A SEARCH FOR PERIODIC EMISSIONS AT THE WOW LOCALE
Robert H. Gray
Gray Data Consulting, 3071 Palmer Square, Chicago, IL 60647; rgray@graydata.net
and
Simon Ellingsen
School of Mathematics and Physics, University of Tasmania, GPO Box 252-21, Hobart 7001, TAS, Australia;
simon.ellingsen@utas.edu.au
Received 2001 May 21; accepted 2002 June 24
ABSTRACT
The Ohio State University Radio Observatory recorded a strong, narrowband emission near the 21 cm
hydrogen line in 1977 during a search for extraterrestrial intelligence, an event known as the ‘‘ Wow ’’ signal.
The few independent attempts to replicate the detection have failed. We have investigated the possibility of a
periodic source—perhaps rotating and illuminating us once each cycle of many hours, like a lighthouse—
which prior observations would have been unlikely to detect. We used the University of Tasmania Hobart 26
m radio telescope to search for intermittent and possibly periodic emissions at the Wow locale by tracking
the apparent source positions for nearly 14 hr continuously on multiple days. No emissions resembling the
Wow were detected over a bandwidth of 2.5 MHz to a ﬂux density limit of about 18 Jy, with a detection
threshold of 5.9  and rms noise of 3 Jy. We conclude that the Wow was not due to a source within our ﬂux
density limits and repeating more often than every 14 hr, although the possibility of a longer period or non-
periodic source cannot be ruled out.
Subject headings: extraterrestrial intelligence — radio lines: general
1. INTRODUCTION
The Wow was a strong (30 , or about 60 Jy), narrow-
band (<10 kHz) emission recorded near the 21 cm H i line at
Ohio State University in 1977 (Kraus 1979; Ehman 19981)
during a search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI), but
not detected again in subsequent follow-up observations at
Ohio State. The event is interesting because the time-
dependent intensity of the emission matched the antenna
pattern signature of a transiting celestial source (Gray &
Marvel 2001), which would not be expected of interference.
Two attempts to independently replicate the detection
have been reported, both unsuccessful. One attempt (Gray
1994) used the ultranarrowband Harvard/Smithsonian-
META system (Horowitz et al. 1986). With 0.05 Hz chan-
nels and a chirped receiver, the observations were sensitive
only to very narrowband and Doppler-corrected artiﬁcial
radio signals; none were detected. A second attempt used
the Very Large Array (Gray & Marvel 2001). With spectral
resolutions of 6.1 and 12.2 kHz, those observations approxi-
mated Ohio State’s 10 kHz bandwidth and were much more
sensitive (20 mJy), capable of detecting weak underlying
continuous sources that might have been brieﬂy enhanced
by interstellar scintillation to produce the Ohio Sate detec-
tion. Dwelling on the apparent source locale for no more
than 22 minutes, those observations were unlikely to detect
intermittent sources.
The Ohio State detection occurred in only one beam of a
dual-beam transit antenna system (Dixon & Cole 1977),
and a simple explanation is that the signal may have been
present only during the time one beam swept past. The two
beams were side by side and separated by 2m50s of right
ascension; celestial sources were usually detected ﬁrst in one
for 72 s, then in the other.
One way to account for an emission present only part of
the time is a rotating source, in which case the emission
might appear periodically. Pulsars are a familiar example.
In the context of interstellar radio signals, an example sce-
nario would be a directional broadcast from a ﬁxed antenna
on the surface of a rotating planet, sweeping across observ-
ers once each ‘‘ day ’’ like a lighthouse. Terrestrial ballistic
missile early warning system radars are an example of such
emissions that are potentially detectable over interstellar
distances (Sullivan, Brown, & Wetherill 1978).
A second possible explanation for the single-beam detec-
tion is a signal drifting in frequency, because the detection
occurred in channel 2 of a 50 channel ﬁlter-bank receiver. It
is possible that a signal with a fortuitous frequency drift
rate, in the range of 100 to 150 Hz s1, drifted into or out
of the band observed during the time between the passage of
the two beams.
We investigated a periodic emission hypothesis because it
is possible to test by the simple expedient of suﬃciently
extended observations. We also incidentally investigated a
drifting frequency hypothesis by observing over a band 5
times wider than Ohio State’s. Other hypotheses can be con-
jured up, of course, including local interference, which is
impossible to rule out.
1.1. Statistics of the Wow Detection
In this section we calculate the probability of the original
Wow detection, assuming emissions of various periods and
durations, with the goal of estimating how long observa-
tions must be to detect a hypothetical periodic source.
We treat each transit observation as a trial, which might
or might not be looking in the right direction at the right
time to observe a periodic source. The binomial distribution
gives the probability PB of an event occurring x times in n
independent trials, given the probability p of the event
1 Available at http://www.bigear.org/wow20th.htm.
The Astrophysical Journal, 578:967–971, 2002 October 20
# 2002. The American Astronomical Society. All rights reserved. Printed in U.S.A.
967
