occurring in a single trial (Zombeck 1990, p. 410). The origi-
nal detection is taken as one success in 18 trials because the
Ohio State transit antenna was typically kept at a constant
declination for 3 days and moved in half-HPBW increments
(Dixon 1985); strong continuous sources could be detected
on 9 days, and the two beams yield 18 trials.
The probability of a detection success during one daily
transit of one beam is simply the fraction of the terrestrial
day a signal is present—for example, p ¼ ð144  24Þ=
86; 400 ¼ 0:04 for a 144 s signal repeating 24 times per
day—and the two beams yield two trials per day. We con-
sider signal durations of 72 (a lower limit for the Wow, since
it was present during the full transit of one beam), 144, and
288 s. Durations shorter than about 100 s guarantee detec-
tion in only one of the two beams, so that the trials are inde-
pendent. Durations longer than about 250 s could be
detected in both beams, which begins to violate the assump-
tion of independent trials.
The probability of detecting a periodic source exactly
once in 18 trials is given in Figure 1 for various periods and
durations. For periods under about 2 hr the probability
reaches over 0.35. For periods over 12 hr the probability of
detection falls below 0.10, and over 24 hr is less than 0.05
for all durations considered. The Wow detection would
seem rather lucky for a source with such a long period,
although the Ohio State survey ran for several years and
covered approximately half of the sky, so if many such sour-
ces existed, detecting one would not be too surprising. This
analysis suggests that a search for periodic emissions should
be extended in time, as long as 10 or 20 hr, but not very
much longer.
We note that the range of periods where detection is not
too improbable (up to 10–20 hr) includes the length of short
planetary days. Sidereal rotation periods probably cannot
be much less than 6 hr because of dynamical considerations
(Lightman 1984). In our solar system four of nine planets
have periods between 10 and 17 hr, two others 24–25 hr,
while the remaining three are much longer. The range of
periods consistent with the Wow thus includes the intriguing
scenario of an emission from the surface of a rotating
planet, although periodicity could arise from other mecha-
nisms as well.
1.2. Conﬁrming Rotating Source Emissions
Ohio State’s 100 follow-up transit observations would
not signiﬁcantly constrain the possibility of a source with a
period of more than several hours because they sampled
sources for only 72 s twice each terrestrial day. For sources
that are themselves periodic, periodic sampling makes a sec-
ond, conﬁrming detection extremely diﬃcult because in
many cases the source will be out of phase with the observa-
tions for many subsequent transits.
A simple discrete computer simulation was performed to
investigate this eﬀect, using as its starting point Ohio State’s
detection, and continuing over 500 subsequent days at 1 s
intervals, for source periods up to 36 hr in 0.01 hr incre-
ments. The source emission was taken as illuminating the
Earth for 144 s during each extraterrestrial day—long
enough for the observed 72 s detection, yet brief enough to
avoid detection in Ohio State’s other beam. A simulated
detection was declared whenever the two simulated rotating
beams overlapped for even a few seconds.
The simulation results show that Ohio State’s subsequent
observations scattered over several hundred days would
have had few opportunities for additional detections, mak-
ing them a poor test for emissions with periods comparable
to planetary days. For nearly half of the periods considered,
a second detection would not occur for 100 days or more,
when both the terrestrial antenna and the source point in
the same direction again, illustrated in Figure 2.
There is no evidence that the Wow was periodic, but a
rotating source is one mechanism that naturally accounts
for the single detection and failure of subsequent detection
eﬀorts.
2. OBSERVATIONS
The apparent coordinates of the Wow emission were
R:A: ¼ 19h22m22s
or
19h25m12s
(both
5s),
decl: ¼
27030  200 (B1950.0; J. D. Kraus 1990, private commu-
nication). The two right ascensions result from the dual-feed
antenna system forming two beams. Ohio State recorded
the diﬀerence in intensity between the two beams, but not
the sign, so there was an ambiguity in which beam the emis-
sion was detected. Revisions to the coordinates have been
proposed (Ehman 1998) but are small enough to neglect in
the present work.
Since objects at the Wow declination are visible for only
4–6 hr daily from most observatories in the northern hemi-
sphere, a southern hemisphere site was necessary. We used
the University of Tasmania Hobart 26 m radio telescope,
which allowed us to track continuously for 14 hr—the maxi-
 
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.—Probability of exactly one detection in 18 trials. The solid line
represents a signal duration of 144 s every n hours. The upper dotted line
represents a signal duration twice as long, the lower dotted line half as long.
The probability of exactly one detection falls oﬀrapidly for periods less
than about 1 hr as a result of multiple detections.
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.—Number of days until a second opportunity for detection using
the Ohio State transit telescope, for sources with periods up to 36 hr. Pros-
pects are especially poor for sources with periods near but not equal to the
terrestrial 23.9345 hr day.
968
GRAY & ELLINGSEN
Vol. 578
